Well, looking over my favorite albums from this year, it's easy to summarize. I listened to a lot of metal in 2019,
and not much else. But what a diversity of metal!

*Land of the Dead* is the most unpolished effort--one guy in Norway screeching into a microphone with
simple piano and guitar melodies underneath. I would call it amateurish if I didn't like it. But somehow it stirred
deep emotion in me, and almost moved me to tears. *The Bleakness of Our Constant* is the product of another
one-man act, but with different aesthetic goals. While *Land of the Dead* conjures magical, Tolkienesque
landscapes, *The Bleakness of Our Constant* is a journey inside the mind of one man suffering deep turmoil.
It is equally personal and sincere. The "doom" vocals, far from being a gimmick, are a natural outgrowth
of the album's throbbing heart.

The next albums in my top set, *Tarot* and *Prokopton*, represent the school of metal that hits melodies hard
and kicks ass. *Prokopton* has terrific orchestral arrangements: you could listen to it without the vocals and
enjoy it tremendously. But you shouldn't listen to it without the vocals, because the vocalist is one of the best that
I heard this year. The first time that I heard "If I Should Die," I had to pull my car over because I was so astonished
by how completely she owned it. *Tarot* relies more on its guitars, although its vocalist is also
quite good. I'm astonished by *Tarot*'s dramatic range. Most of the albums that I listen to sink deeply into a single
mood...the good ones communicate it well, and the bad ones make a mockery of it. *Tarot* takes its listeners on a
kaleidoscopic journey, through the heights of ecstasy to the humiliation of death. By the end of the
album, when the vocalist sings, "For nature is calling, my heart compelled--every branch, every leaf has a story to
tell," I felt deeply moved.

*Tamsins Iikam* is the most recent addition to this list, and also the strangest. This is pure doom metal--there is
nothing soft or reassuring to grab hold of. The lyrics aren't in English, but the music's emotional register is
unmistakable. This is what despair sounds like. Now, a lot of albums--especially
doom metal albums--try to set this mood. What sets *Tamsins Iikam* apart is that, like a Shakespearean
tragedy, it grasps and expresses the beauty of despair...how despair has the power to reveal our deepest, and
sometimes noblest, human traits. It's difficult to listen to, but also lovely.

Which of the five is the best? I'm not going to say because I don't know. But regardless of whether you think you
like metal, I would be astonished if at least one of these five doesn't speak to you.
